
## Reading:  “Humanities approaches to graphical display”: 

- humanists have adopted many applications such as GIS mapping, graphs, and charts for statistical display that were developed in other disciplines. But, I will argue, such graphical tools are a kind of intellectual Trojan horse, a vehicle through which assumptions about what constitutes information swarm with potent force. These assumptions are cloaked in a rhetoric taken wholesale from the techniques of the empirical sciences that conceals their epistemological biases under a guise of familiarity. 
- Because realist approaches to visualization assume transparency and equivalence, as if the phenomenal world were self-evident and the apprehension of it a mere mechanical task, they are fundamentally at odds with approaches to humanities scholarship premised on constructivist principles.
- the task of representing ambiguity and uncertainty has to be distinguished from a second task – that of using interpretations that arise in observer-codependence, characterized by ambiguity and uncertainty, as the basis on which a representation is constructed. This is the difference between putting many kinds of points on a map to show degrees of certainty by shades of color, degrees of crispness, transparency etc., and creating a map whose basic coordinate grid is constructed as an effect of these ambiguities. In the first instance, we have a standard map with a nuanced symbol set. In the second, we create a non-standard map that expresses the constructed-ness of space. Both rely on rethinking our approach to visualization and the assumptions that underpin it.

- *Capta vs. data:*
Capta is "taken" actively while data is assumed to be a "given" able to be recorded and observed. From this distinction, a world of differences arises. Humanistic inquiry acknowledges the situated, partial, and constitutive character of knowledge production, the recognition that knowledge is constructed, taken, not simply given as a natural representation of pre-existing fact.

- what is needed is not a set of applications to display humanities "data" but a new approach that uses humanities principles to constitute capta and its display.

- *Principles for Digital Humanities and visualization:*
I take these principles to be, first, that the humanities are committed to the concept of knowledge as interpretation, and, second, that the apprehension of the phenomena of the physical, social, cultural world is through constructed and constitutive acts, not mechanistic or naturalistic realist representations of pre-existing or self-evident information. Nothing in intellectual life is self-evident or self-identical, nothing in cultural life is mere fact, and nothing in the phenomenal world gives rise to a record or representation except through constructed expressions. The rhetorical force of graphical display is too important a field for its design to be adopted without critical scrutiny and the full force of theoretical insight.

### Data as capta: from information visualization to graphical expressions of interpretation:

- Lines, bars, columns, and pie charts are the common and familiar forms. They render quantitative relations with a transparency that seems natural.
*BUT* Data are capta, taken not given, constructed as an interpretation of the phenomenal world, not inherent in it.
- That is the foundation and purpose of a humanistic approach to the qualitative display of graphical information. Read that last formulation carefully, humanistic approach means that the premises are rooted in the recognition of the interpretative nature of knowledge, that the display itself is conceived to embody qualitative expressions, and that the information is understood as graphically constituted. Each of these factors contains an explicit critique of assumptions in the conventional "visual display of quantitative information" that is the common currency.

- *Example of gender distribution across 7 nations:*
Questions that arise: What counts as a nation? Are transient and immigrant populations documented? What kind of time span counts as "at the present time" within which these populations are counted? If the basic bar chart would have looked like a series of bands showing discrete categories of information in finite and certain numbers (all due statistical caveats noted), what are the problems? Gender definition assumes a simple binary distinction of men and women, an assumption much debated and highly problematic (gender can be understood as a factor of behavior, physiological changes, social expectations, dress, etc., and nation as a function of permeability of borders, citizenship patterns, naturalization rules, immigration regulations, quotas and border policies). So the bar chart reifies several categories, naturalizing them as discrete and fixed: national populations, time span, and gender defined as a simple binary. The representation can only be modified by changing the terms and premises on which it is constructed. What would a representation of gender by sliding scale look like? How would permeable boundaries to nations whose populations cross each others borders be shown? How would they dissolve the bar chart’s basic structure? How would notions of the present be defined?

By recognizing the always interpreted character of data we have shifted from data to capta, acknowledging the constructed-ness of the categories according to the uses and expectations for which they are put in service. Nations, genders, populations, and time spans are not self-evident, stable entities that exist a priori. They are each subject to qualifications and reservations that bear directly on and arise from the reality of lived experience. The presentation of the comparison in the original formulation grotesquely distorts the complexity — but also, the basic ambiguity — of the phenomenon under investigation (gender, nations, populations). If the challenge we are facing were merely to accommodate higher levels of complexity into a data representation model, that would require one set of considerations and modifications. But the more profound challenge we face is to accept the ambiguity of knowledge, the fundamentally interpreted condition on which data is constructed, in other words, the realization of my refrain–that all data is capta.

- The shift to expressive metrics and graphics is essential in changing from the expression of subjective information to the subjective expression of perceived phenomena, but subjectivity and inflection are not the only features of interpretative approaches. Capta is not an expression of idiosyncracy, emotion, or individual quirks, but a systematic expression of information understood as constructed, as phenomena perceived according to principles of interpretation. To do this, we need to conceive of every metric "as a factor of X", where X is a point of view, agenda, assumption, presumption, or simply a convention. By qualifying any metric as a factor of some condition, the character of the "information" shifts from self-evident "fact" to constructed interpretation motivated by a human agenda.

- In conventional statistical graphics, the scale divisions are equal units. In humanistic, interpretative, graphics, they are not.
In statistical graphics the coordinate lines are always continuous and straight. In humanistic, interpretative, graphics, they might have breaks, repetitions, and curves or dips. Interpretation is stochastic and probabilistic, not mechanistic, and its uncertainties require the same mathematical and computational models as other complex systems.
The scale figures and labels in statistical graphics need to be clear and legible in all cases, and all the more so in humanistic, interpretative, graphics since they will need to do quite a bit of work.
Perhaps the most striking feature distinguishing humanistic, interpretative, and constructivist graphical expressions from realist statistical graphics is that the curves, bars, columns, percentage values would not always be represented as discrete bounded entities, but as conditional expressions of interpretative parameters–a kind of visual fuzzy logic or graphical complexity. Thus their edges might be permeable, lines dotted and broken, dots and points vary in size and scale or degree of ambiguity of placement, and so on.

- _**All metrics are metrics about something for some purpose.**_

- Subjective information can use graphical means to show its inflected character, demonstrating its deviation from standard norms in the way the display looks, or, in dynamic displays, the way it acts. One might imagine skittish points on an unstable grid to display the degrees of anxiety around a particular event or task, for instance, or points that glow hot or cold depending on the other elements that approach them. That would be a subjective — even affective — display of information.

### Time As Temporality:

- The relational structure of temporality is always constituted according to inflections and variables. Not all days are equal. Or all minutes. Or all hours. Time understood as temporality can be succinctly stated as follows: Temporality = time as a factor of X where X is any variable (fear, speed, anxiety, foreshadowing, regret, reconsideration, narration, etc.).

- Humanists deal with the representation of temporality of documents (when they were created), in documents (narrated, represented, depicted temporality), the construction of temporality across documents (the temporality of historical events), and also the shape of temporality that emerges from documentary evidence (the shape of an era, a season, a period or epoch). They need a way to graph and chart temporality in an approach that suits the basic principles of interpretative knowledge.
- These included graphical expressions meant to meet the needs of multiple points of view, reworking events according to a changed position within a temporal sequence, and a set of what we called inflections. Inflections, a kind of legend for marking points, intervals, or events (our basic units) with a quality or attribute, were divided into semantic and syntactic types. Semantic inflections were given their characteristics independently, as entities, and the vocabulary of attributes included degrees of intensity and other qualities. Syntactic inflections were characterized as relational, marking the effect of one event, point, or interval or another.
Methods for graphing the elastic or "rubber-sheet" timelines meant to show the subjective variations in temporality can be derived from catastrophe theory, chaos diagrams, and the visualizations of stochastic and complex systems.
- By breaking the relentlessly regular grid, the potential for graphing temporal modeling as a complex system of events is greatly enhanced. The relational, and co-dependent quality of temporal events finds its expression in these more sophisticated models

### Space as Spatiality:
But how could we visualize the spatial distortions introduced by variables such as fearfulness, anxiety, anticipation, distraction, or dalliance and thus render space as spatiality, space as a factor of x? Some variable is always in play in the experience of space as well as its representation, so space is also always constructed according to a specific agenda and a situated experience etc. While this is the common experience of the phenomenal world, representations of spatiality have lagged behind, dominated by the navigational or descriptive systems of standard mapping whose conventions are well known and recognized, and which partake of and impose the dominant realist model.

-In proposing a new model for humanities’ work, I am suggesting that the subjective display of humanistic phenomena can be applied across the domains with which we are concerned at at least four basic levels of interpretation or knowledge production.
1. Modelling phenomenological experience in the making of humanities (data as capta, primary modeling, the representation of temporal and spatial experience);
2. Modeling relations among humanities documents i.e. discourse fields (a different metric is needed to understand dates on diplomatic documents in the spring of 1944 than one needed to constitute understanding of those dated to the same period of the spring of 1950 etc.);
3. Modeling the representations of temporality and spatiality that are in humanities documents (narrative is the most obvious);
4. Modeling the interpretation of any of the above (depicting or graphing the performative quality of interpretation).

- Take another example, a map tracing a journey between London and Prague in the 1810s.; How does the space change dimensions to reflect hazard, delays, dalliances, terrain changes, interruptions of war and political strife, danger, weather, or illness? A legend or set of labels or markings could indicate these inflections of the space simply by putting symbols on a map. That would be the registration of subjective data on a conventional map. But mapping conventions don’t morph the landscape to accommodate the effects of fear, anger, or violence. Now change the map, distort its proportions so that it becomes a terrain shaped by fear, by obstacles, by disruptions and confusions.

- The challenge of representing large corpora of texts and immense archives also requires attention, in part because the conventions of wayfinding and navigation that are part of print media and its institutional structures are not yet reworked in a digital environment meant to address the shifts in scale and experience brought on by new media. On top of the challenge of representing repositories and their use, we can point to another challenge –that of giving graphical expression to interpretations built on and out of documents, or collections of documents.

### Conclusion:
- But the idea of capta as fundamentally co-dependent, constituted relationally, between observer and observed phenomena, is fundamentally different from the concept of data created as an observer-independent phenomena. That realization has to be at the heart of humanistic approaches to the graphical display of interpretative phenomena, of interpreted artifacts and the acts of interpretation themselves. Because interpretation is performative, bringing objects into view through a reading or other act of intervention, it forecloses the possibility that autonomous objects or phenomena exist within the horizon of human experience. Phenomena of human experience are constituted as interpretative acts.

- The natural world and its cultural corollary exist, but the humanistic concept of knowledge depends upon the interplay between a situated and circumstantial viewer and the objects or experiences under examination and interpretation. That is the basic definition of humanistic knowledge, and its graphical display must be specific to this definition in its very foundational principles. The challenge is enormous, but essential, if the humanistic worldview, grounded in the recognition of the interpretative nature of knowledge, is to be part of the graphical expressions that come into play in the digital environment. If we don’t engage with this challenge, we give the game away in advance, ceding the territory of interpretation to the ruling authority of certainty established on the false claims of observer-independent objectivity in the "visual display of quantitative information."

## Reading: "The Embodied GIS. Using Mixed Reality to explore multi-sensory archaeological landscapes":

- This article explores a number of ways that these new multi-sensory developments can be harnessed and linked to a traditional GIS database using Mixed Reality. Through the example of three different sensory applications, I will demonstrate the implementation of an embodied GIS – allowing a multi-sensorial experience of archaeological data in situ, and enabling archaeologists to explore data in new ways, encouraging new interpretations by thinking and working through the body.
- MR (*Mixed Reality*) provides an opportunity to merge the real world with virtual elements of relevance to the past, including 3D models, soundscapes, smellscapes and other immersive data. In this way, the results of sophisticated desk-based GIS analyses can be experienced directly within the field and combined with a body-centred exploration of the landscape, creating an embodied GIS.

### Virtual Reality/Mixed Reality?!:
- the term Virtual Reality now really only covers one aspect of so-called virtuality. As technology has advanced, we are now able to merge computer-generated 'reality' with the real world, creating a Mixed Reality (MR) (Ohta and Tamura 1999). This has lead to the creation of a scale of virtuality – the Reality- Virtuality continuum (Milgram and Colquhoun 1999) – shown in Figure 1. This scale goes from the Real Environment (RE) through Augmented Reality (AR), Augmented Virtuality (AV) to a full Virtual Environment (VE).
- The focus for this article is the Augmented Reality (AR) section of the continuum. AR is a blend of the real world with some limited level of augmentation from the virtual world. AR 'allows a user to work in a real world environment while visually receiving additional computer-generated or modelled information to support the task at hand'.

### Embodied GIS:
- AR can be used in an active way as a means of investigation and to find out new things about the past, rather than just to consume existing knowledge.
- we need to move away from the office and use the GIS technology to give archaeological objects and concepts a place in physical space. We need to be able to explore and use the GIS data within the space that is being modelled.
- My concept of an embodied GIS, then, is simply this – the combination of traditional GIS technology and Augmented Reality technology – allowing the experience of the GIS data within the field and the ability to feed directly from the field into the GIS. All of the data held within the GIS should be readily accessible when actually visiting the archaeological site. The data need to be able to be sensualised as if they were directly there in the landscape – overlaid on the hills, plains and rivers themselves, reacting, developing and changing as one moves through the space. 

### The Embodied GIS in Action:

#### Vision(Leskernick Hill, Bodmin Moor, Cornwall. England)
-  I undertook a formal experiment to investigate the effectiveness of using visual augmentation in the embodied GIS to provide a feeling of presence in the landscape and to assess whether the embodied GIS helps in identifying the location, size and shape of the Bronze Age houses. *gives feeling of landscape 'coming to life'*

#### Sound (York Municipal Cemetery, England):
- Our team decided to explore the use of sound in the cemetery and by creating a multi-layered soundscape aimed to see how that would affect a visitor to the cemetery and also investigate its power as a pedagogical tool, enabling visitors to engage further with the history of the cemetery itself. The resulting application, entitled Voices/Recognition, was 'designed to augment one's interaction with York Cemetery, its spaces and visible features, by giving a voice to the invisible features that represent the primary reason for the cemetery's existence: accommodation of the bodies buried underground'. 
- Voices/Recognition takes this basic premise and applies it to the data from the cemetery records. By geolocating each grave and creating data about the grave occupant from the census records and the headstone it is possible to create a standard GIS database of each grave and its associated data. Many cemeteries already hold this data and it is used for many straightforward queries, some as simple as finding the grave of one's relatives. However, when the database is used with the Voices/Recognition application, this database can then be used to play each grave's 'story' as the user is walking around the cemetery. The resulting embodied GIS takes this seemingly prosaic database of grave details and transforms it into a 'live' database that can be explored and experienced in situ.

####   Smell (Moesgård Archaeological Trail, Denmark):
"Smell, this most liminal of senses, carries a great subversive potential in its ability to violate boundaries, assault rationality, and evoke powerful emotions of disgust and attraction." (Fjellestad 2001, 650).
- The everyday for people in the past was not just experienced through what they could see or hear, and smell clearly played a vital part in the sensorium of the past.
- As the video shows, the Dead Man's Nose consists of an Arduino board, battery, a BluetoothLE chip, and four small fans contained within small boxes. The boxes contain small drawers in which a scent can be placed on a small piece of cotton wool, which is then dispersed when the fans blow. The fan boxes also have small pieces of velcro on the back, allowing them to be attached either to clothing or to a board that can be worn around the neck (as seen in the video)

#### Conclusion:
- The embodied GIS is not a system that encourages mere consumption of data; instead it fosters the opportunity to question both the landscape being walked through, and the data that underlie the computational analysis. I have shown the potential of a mixed reality application to transform practice in landscape archaeology and bridge the middle ground between computational and phenomenological fieldwork and, in doing so, I have created a way in which we can view archaeological landscapes in a more nuanced and sometimes completely different light. We can now experiment with the experiential approach in situ but in such a way that the conditions of the experiments can be reproduced, shared and documented.

# Mapping: December 8th
omeka.org

Questions/Look at maps/Definitions/Humanities and Geography(cartography)

- OpenStreetMap: community driven mapping site. Allows local users to contribute and maintain maps. 
waze: crowd source traffic.

Defining mapping in the digital humanities: maps have power, impose a narrative, visualize a concept. demonstrate relationships between things: representation can reflect power structure/idea of knowledge and truth. 

Adding the human to space and place. Place is marked by experience. Recent human geography considers 'placelessness and nonplace'. Globalization and mobility. 

http://mapwarper.net/maps/tile/26451/{z}/{x}/{y}.png
