## Reading: *"Community" by Bridget Draxler* :

There are problems with the term community: can foster a false sense of belonging/be used to manipulate (think about online community). But also can be hopeful.

- Digital spaces exacerbate this tension in the academy’s relationship to a term like “community.” Digital tools can seem to undermine traditional notions of community, highlighting the term’s meaninglessness through the apparent detachment of virtual engagement. The idea of “digital community” can seem like an oxymoron, with the fluidity, expansiveness, and disembodiment of online groups. But if digital tools are changing and questioning our understanding of what constitutes community, they are also giving us new ways of engaging with community, and new communities to engage with.

-  The notion that community is something to actively and intentionally create, rather than something you’re born into, gives participants deeper agency and investment–a quality that is not exclusive to virtual communities but is certainly championed by them. And, joining communities by choice online can make us rethink, for better or worse, the communities we find ourselves in by default.

- For the twenty-first-century humanist, the community is not our audience but our collaborator.

### Curated Artifacts (Examples): 

- 18th Connect: 18th Connect is a database of eighteenth-century texts driven by values of sharing and service. Along with features typical of online communities (discussions, groups) and scholarly communities (peer review, searchable archives), it offers scholars and advanced students an opportunity to receive plain and TEI-encoded copies of texts from ProQuest and Gale in exchange for correcting any OCR errors in these texts.

- Grinnel Beowulf: Engaging students in the task of translating and annotating Beowulf for modern readers, Tim Arner (Grinnell College) created a for-students, by-students teaching edition of the early English text. The digital text offers an example of how public digital humanities projects can reframe students as teachers, democratizing not only access to but production of knowledge online.

- The Passport Project: The Passport Project is an innovative first-year course that asks students to blog about community events representing the arts, humanities, sciences, along with political events and performances in dance, theater, and music. Peer Mentors, recent graduates of the program, lead small group discussions. 

- Intro to Public Arts & Humanities: In Elizabeth Goodhue’s Intro to Public Arts & Humanities course, undergraduate students spend a week discussing the intersection of community engagement and digital humanities.

- AnnoTate: Volunteers transcribe diaries, letters and other manuscripts to make these archives searchable and accessible to new readers.

- HASTAC: HASTAC is an example of an online community in its best form, with a diverse and active readership.

- Mapping the Republic of Letters: that contextualizes the intellectual network of key early modern thinkers. By identifying moments of exchange and influence, the tool reframes Western thought from a series of important figures to a rich intellectual community. 

- Our Marathon: Our Marathon invites community contributors to share stories, images, and other media of their experiences. The crowd-sourced storytelling archive is intended explicitly as a tool for community healing, and a means of creating an organic, community-driven memorial.

- Public Matters: is "an interdisciplinary, social enterprise" dedicated to designing and implementing "innovative programs that build social, creative, and civic capital in communities." 

- Artists in Community: serves as a model of a discipline-specific community engagement project that capitalizes on digital technology and relationship building to create partnerships between students and non-profit agencies.

## Reading: *"Can History be Open Source? Wikipedia and the Future of the Past" by Roy Rosenzweig*:

- Wikipedia is entirely free. And that freedom includes not just the ability of anyone to read it (a freedom denied by the scholarly journals in, say, jstor, which requires an expensive institutional subscription) but also—more remarkably—their freedom to use it. This extraordinary freedom and cooperation make Wikipedia the most important application of the principles of the free and open-source software movement to the world of cultural, rather than software, production.

### How Wikipedia works:
- "Wikipedia,"they declare first, "is an encyclopedia. Its goals go no further." Personal essays, dictionary entries, critical reviews, "propaganda or advocacy," and "original research" are excluded. 
- The second key Wikipedian injunction is to "avoid bias." "Articles should be written from a neutral point of view [npov]," they insist, "representing differing views on a subject factually and objectively."
- Of course, writing "without bias"—even in the circumscribed way that Wikipedia defines it—is, as Wikipedians concede, "difficult" since "all articles are edited by people" and "people are inherently biased."
- The gfdl (and gpl) deviate most surprisingly from conventional intellectual property rules by giving you the freedom to use the text however you wish. As the license states: "You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either commercially or noncommercially, provided . . . you add no other conditions whatsoever to those of this License.

### Wikipedia as History:
- Participation in Wikipedia entries generally maps popular, rather than academic, interests in history. 
- Wikipedia's authors do not come from a cross-section of the world's population. They are more likely to be English-speaking, males, and denizens of the Internet. Such bias has occasioned much discussion, including among Wikipedians. A page of candid self-criticism titled "Why Wikipedia Is Not So Great," acknowledges that "geek priorities" have shaped the encyclopedia
- the largest bias—at least in the English-language version—favors Western culture (and English-speaking nations), rather than geek or popular culture.
- Thus, the free and open-source encyclopedia Wikipedia offers a formidable challenge to the well-established and seemingly authoritative Encyclopedia Britannica as well as to Microsoft's newer and well-regarded Encarta.
- Overall, writing is the Achilles' heel of Wikipedia. Committees rarely write well, and Wikipedia entries often have a choppy quality that results from the stringing together of sentences or paragraphs written by different people. Some Wikipedians contribute their services as editors and polish the prose of different articles. But they seem less numerous than other types of volunteers. Few truly gifted writers volunteer for Wikipedia. Encarta, while less comprehensive than Wikipedia, generally offers better—especially, more concise—writing.
- The wiki software allows you to compare every single version of an article going back to its creation.
- Another possible improvement would have readers rate the quality of individual Wikipedia entries, an approach used by a number of popular Internet sites,

### Why Should We Care? Implications for Historians:
- One reason professional historians need to pay attention to Wikipedia is because our students do.
- when you search Google for some obscure term that Wikipedia knows about, you might get two dozen results that all say the same thing—seemingly authoritative until you realize they all spread from a snapshot of Wiki—one that is now severed from the context of editability and might seem more creditable than it really is."
- Teachers have little more to fear from students' starting with Wikipedia than from their starting with most other basic reference sources. They have a lot to fear if students stop there. To state the obvious: Wikipedia is an encyclopedia, and encyclopedias have intrinsic limits.
- Professional historians have things to learn not only from the open and democratic distribution model of Wikipedia but also from its open and democratic production model. Although Wikipedia as a product is problematic as a sole source of information, the process of creating Wikipedia fosters an appreciation of the very skills that historians try to teach.
- Wikipedia and Linux show that there are alternative models to producing encyclopedias and software than the hierarchical, commercial model represented by Bill Gates and Microsoft. And whether or not historians consider alternative models for producing their own work, they should pay closer attention to their erstwhile competitors at Wikipedia than Microsoft devoted to worrying about an obscure free and open-source operating system called Linux.

## Reading: *"Crowdmilking" by Trebor Scholz*: 

- Incredibly shaky working conditions lead to personal despair but such precarity should not be understood as unsolvable individual problem. At least 10 million people are working in the crowdsourcing industry and you can add the some 42 million US-American freelancers, and the unpaid student interns who --according to Ross Perlin-- generate at least $2 billion in profits for corporate America each year. And don’t forget the 20,000 Japanese workers who die of Karoshi, death-by-overwork, year in year out. 
- Essentially, digital labor and crowdsourcing in particular, set back the clock for organized labor to the second half of the 19th century when the 80-hour week was the norm. 
- DIGITAL LABOUR AND MARXISM
- Much of the literature is coming to terms with what labor actually means in the context of the Internet. Is labor even the right term to apply here? Is what we are seeing on Facebook really Exploitation 2.0, or, "crowdmilking," as I refer to it? Scholars account for the blurring of work and leisure, play and labor. The German media theorist Julian Kuecklich introduced the term playbor.
- DEFINING DIGITAL LABOUR: *a human activity sometimes undertaken solely for pleasure that has economic and symbolic value and can be performed at any time. This labor is not bound to the factory, the office, or the household; it is performed constantly – in real time- on unprecedented scale and on a large variety of devices. Leisure and work are enmeshed beyond recognition.* 
- WE ARE ALL PARTICIPATING IN IT (EXAMPLES OF EXPLOITATION): 
Huffington is an interesting example because publishers and magazines like The Atlantic often cite such writing for exposure in their effort to explain why they’re not paying some of their writers (Coscarelli). “‘Exposure Doesn’t Feed My F*cking Children!, ’ as one journalist put it.

The broad landscape of unwaged digital work also includes the volunteer customer service workers who put in regular shifts for free on sites like Apple or Verizon. And yes, I am also talking about our cognitive labor on Facebook, Reddit, LinkedIn, and Google.

- If we are not paying for the service, then we are the product and services like Gmail and Facebook are becoming socially too expensive.

- But let’s take a slight turn at this point, and also acknowledge that there are forms of digital work that I’m more than happy to give away for free. They are equally part of this landscape and it doesn’t need much explanation when I say that working for Wikipedia, Open Street Map, Science Commons, Foldit,[12] Challenge.org, Distributed Proofreaders, or eBird [13], is not the same like “working for,” contributing our time and data to, corporate intermediaries.

- WAGED DIGITAL LABOUR:
99designs offers competitive, crowdsourcing for designers.  Currently, the company has a pool of 200,000 registered designers who engage in such speculative design work, which the Society of Graphic Designers of Canada prohibits for its certified members.

So, for example if you are a client who is looking for a logo you might spend the very reasonable sum of $300. And for that you receive 116 completely executed designs. But of these 116 designers only one will receive the payment of $180, and I’m not sure if I have to spell this out but that means that 115 designers worked for free, for no pay at all.
*IDEA OF WASTING CREATIVE LABOUR*

- ANYONE CAN ENTER THE FIELD, EXPERIENCE MEANS NOTHING: What it means to be a designer, then, has completely changed.
- “The border is closed but the network is open. Employers get all the work without the worker,” as Alex Rivera put it in his film Sleep Dealer: no commitment, no care for the worker, just a “superabundance” of the global 24/7 work force.
- Importantly, companies insist that all crowdsourced workers are independent contactors instead of employees, a status that would come with rights. 
**DOMESTIC DIGITAL LABOUR**: (AMT) There is an intriguing parallel to care work, to invisible domestic labor, to the Wages for Housework Campaign that didn’t so much ask for housework to be paid by the hour but that much more questioned the entire social construction of that work
- AMT uses imperfect computers to integrate a network of humans into the processes of the machine. It is trying to make you forget about the workers.
**The goal of Amazon Mechanical Turk is profit and not the liberation of workers.**
- I doubt that any of you would be surprised if I tell you that for employers, or what Amazon calls "requesters," this is a sugar sweet deal. They have access to a global 24/7 workforce on demand, they remain anonymous and they only pay if they are satisfied with the results. Or, they don’t pay at all and can still use the work. Amazon explicitly permits that.
-On Amazon Mechanical Turk, some people get busy after their regular job is done; they do it instead of watching television. The division between work/play, work/consumption, and work/entertainment and work/leisure is blurred beyond recognition. Some AMT workers don’t think of what they are doing as labor.
- If current trends continue, crowdsourcing will be associated with virtual sweatshops

The Digital Space:
Idea of self vs crowd. Presentation of the self (ie Facebook). Performance of the self. 
- Defining community: personal connection. self-identification. intentional engagement. more formal leadership. Set requirements for belonging. sometimes is imposed as a means of control of a demographic: ie indigenous peoples. 
- Defining Crowds: less interpersonal. negative iterations of communities. mob  mentality. involuntary membership/ more situational, less permanent. more self-serving. 
- alternative to community: a network.
