# Sound

## Reading: *The Ground Truth of DH Text Mining* by TANYA E. CLEMENT: 
In the digital humanities, text mining is a logocentric practice. That is, text mining in digital humanities usually begins with The Word. We extract The Word; we count The Word; we stem The Word to its root; we parse The Word; we name The Word; we disambiguate The Word; we collocate The Word; we count The Word again; we apply an algorithm that allows us to reconstruct the world of The Word as one we can visualize as a list, as a line graph, as a histogram in small multiples, or on big screens. We use the view this new world provides us to interpret The Word.
This practice of text mining presupposes a binary logic; there is meaning in the results or there is not.
**Mining sound is very different from mining text; more questions to consider like who is listening, what are we mining, how long is a sound?**

## Reading: *Sound* by Steph Ceraso: 

- Writing with sound: Examples include assignments such as audio essays and voiceovers for digital videos, both of which involve composing and recording written scripts.
- Curating Sound: Having students examine and/or produce digital sound archives. Think of Roaring Twenties sonification, or things like Data Driven DJ. 
- Sound Mapping: : Sound maps, or digital maps with embedded sound files, have become a common genre of digital composition for scholarly and community-based work
- Critical Listening:  Rather than taking listening for granted as something that people simply do, this approach involves teaching students to reflect on their own listening practices and to consider how their listening practices have changed over time in response to personal, cultural, historical, and technological developments. 

The reading also provides a variety of interesting examples/resources for soundscaping/experimenting with sound. 

## Reading: *Sonic Word Clouds - a Digital History Project* by DANIEL RUTEN:

the choices one makes regarding how to represent data sonically in this fashion reveal the ways in which we privilege, condense and transform information as historians. 
sonification’s value as a reflective exercise for historians, whose novelty can reveal both patterns of data and patterns of practice that we typically would not recognize in a more familiar context.
